The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Ohio Journal of Science, Vol. XVI, No.
1, November 1915, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Ohio Journal of Science, Vol. XVI, No. 1, November 1915

Author: Various

Release Date: April 26, 2017 [EBook #54609]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OHIO JOURNAL OF SCIENCE, NOV 1915 ***




Produced by Larry B. Harrison, Paul Marshall and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from images made available by the
HathiTrust Digital Library.)









                               NOVEMBER,
                 Volume XVI.       1915      Number 1.

                                The Ohio

                           Journal of Science

                 (Continuation of The Ohio Naturalist)

                         Official Organ of the

                OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY SCIENTIFIC SOCIETY

                               and of the

                        OHIO ACADEMY OF SCIENCE

                             COLUMBUS, OHIO

     Annual Subscription Price, $2.00      Single Number, 30 Cents

 Entered at the Post-Office at Columbus, Ohio, as Second-Class Matter.




                      THE OHIO JOURNAL OF SCIENCE

                            PUBLISHED BY THE

                Ohio State University Scientific Society

                Issued Monthly during the Academic Year,
                 from November to June (eight numbers).

             OFFICIAL ORGAN OF THE OHIO ACADEMY OF SCIENCE

        Subscription Price: $2.00 per Year, payable in advance;
                      to Foreign Countries, $2.50.
                        Single Copies, 30 Cents.

                Editor,                JOHN H. SCHAFFNER
                Associate Editor,          JAMES S. HINE
                Associate Editor,      FREDERICK W. IVES


                            EDITORIAL BOARD

              J. F. LYMAN           Agricultural Chemistry
              F. W. IVES          Agricultural Engineering
              A. G. MCCALL                        Agronomy
              F. L. LANDACRE                       Anatomy
              J. H. SCHAFFNER                       Botany
              CARL B. HARROP           Ceramic Engineering
              JAS. R. WITHROW                    Chemistry
              F. H. ENO                  Civil Engineering
              N. W. SCHERER                       Forestry
              C. S. PROSSER                        Geology
              V. H. DAVIS                     Horticulture
              W. A. KNIGHT                 Industrial Arts
              C. J. WEST                       Mathematics
              HORACE JUDD           Mechanical Engineering
              JONATHAN FORMAN                    Pathology
              F. C. BLAKE                          Physics
              R. J. SEYMOUR           Physiology (General)
              CLAYTON MCPEEK          Physiology (Medical)
              E. R. HAYHURST    Public Health & Sanitation
              J. S. HINE            Zoology and Entomology

The OHIO JOURNAL OF SCIENCE is owned and controlled by the Ohio State
University Scientific Society. By a special arrangement with the
Ohio Academy of Science, the OHIO JOURNAL OF SCIENCE is sent without
additional expense to all members of the Academy who are not in arrears
for annual dues.

The first fifteen volumes of the old OHIO NATURALIST may be
obtained at $1.00 per volume.

Remittances of all kinds should be made payable to the Business
Manager, J. S. HINE.

 Address      =The Ohio Journal of Science=      Ohio State University,
                                COLUMBUS

                =Ohio Academy of Science Publications=.

     First and Second Annual Reports            Price 30 cts. each
     Third and Fourth Annual Reports            Price 25 cts. each
     Fifth to Sixteenth Annual Reports          Price 20 cts. each
     Seventeenth Annual Report                  Price 40 cts. each


                            SPECIAL PAPERS.

  1. Sandusky Flora. pp. 107. E. L. MOSELEY                     60 cts.
  2. The Odonata of Ohio. pp. 116. DAVID S. KELLICOTT           60 cts.
  3. The Preglacial Drainage of Ohio. pp. 75. W. G. TIGHT,
     J. A. BOWNOCKER, J. H. TODD and GERARD FOWKE               50 cts.
  4. The Fishes of Ohio. pp. 105. RAYMOND C. OSBURN             60 cts.
  5. Tabanidæ of Ohio. pp. 63. JAMES S. HINE                    50 cts.
  6. The Birds of Ohio. pp. 241. LYNDS JONES                    75 cts.
  7. Ecological Study of Big Spring Prairie. pp. 96.
     THOMAS A. BONSER                                           50 cts.
  8. The Coccidæ of Ohio, i. pp. 66. JAMES G. SANDERS           50 cts.
  9. Batrachians and Reptiles of Ohio. pp. 54. MAX MORSE        50 cts.
  10. Ecological Study of Brush Lake. pp. 20. J. H. SCHAFFNER,
     OTTO E. JENNINGS, FRED J. TYLER                            35 cts.
  11. The Willows of Ohio. pp. 60. ROBERT F. GRIGGS             50 cts.
  12. Land and Fresh-water Mollusca of Ohio. pp. 35. V. STERKJ  50 cts.
  13. The Protozoa of Sandusky Bay and Vicinity. F. L. LANDACRE 60 cts.
  14. Discomycetes in the Vicinity of Oxford, Ohio. pp. 54.
       FREDA M. BACHMAN                                         50 cts.
  15. Trees of Ohio and Surrounding Territory. pp. 122.
       JOHN H. SCHAFFNER                                        75 cts.
  16. The Pteridophytes of Ohio. pp. 41. JOHN H. SCHAFFNER      50 cts.
  17. Fauna of the Maxville Limestone. pp. 65. W. C. MORSE      60 cts.
  18. The Agaricaceæ of Ohio. pp. 116. W. G. STOVER             75 cts.
  19. An Ecological Study of Buckeye Lake. pp. 138.
       FREDERICA DETMERS                                        75 cts.

  Address: C. W. REEBE, Librarian, Ohio Academy of Science.
           Library, Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.




THE OHIO JOURNAL OF SCIENCE

PUBLISHED BY THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY SCIENTIFIC SOCIETY

              VOLUME XVI       NOVEMBER, 1915        NO. 1

                           TABLE OF CONTENTS

    INTRODUCTORY                                                    1
    LORD—The Making of a Photographic Objective                     3
    TRANSEAU—Notes on the Zygnemales                               17
    Organization of the Ohio State University Scientific Society   32


INTRODUCTORY.

Fifteen years ago the Biological Club of the Ohio State University
began publishing THE OHIO NATURALIST. This Journal has had a continuous
existence and has been an important medium in advancing the knowledge
of the natural history of the state. A number of years ago the
NATURALIST became the official organ of the Ohio Academy of Science
and was thus sent to every member of the Academy. At that time the
Ohio Academy was largely composed of Biologists and Geologists, but
has now widened its scope to include Physicists, Mathematicians, and
others. It was, therefore, thought desirable by many that the scope of
the NATURALIST should be enlarged so as to make it representative of
all of the activities of the Academy. In accordance with this desire,
committees were appointed by the various departments interested and a
plan for future publication was proposed which was finally adopted.

The Ohio State University Scientific Society was thus organized at
the Ohio State University and will take over the control of the new
publication. This Society is to have somewhat the same relationship
to THE OHIO JOURNAL OF SCIENCE as the Biological Club had to the Ohio
Naturalist. The management of the Journal is under an Editorial Board
made up of representatives of various scientific departments of the
University. This Board elects annually the Editor and two Associate
Editors.

                       EDITORIAL BOARD.

Agricultural Chemistry, J. F. Lyman; Agricultural Engineering, F. W.
Ives; Agronomy, A. G. McCall; Anatomy, F. L. Landacre; Botany, J.
H. Schaffner; Ceramic Engineering, Carl B. Harrop; Chemistry, Jas.
R. Withrow; Civil Engineering, F. H. Eno; Forestry, N. W. Scherer;
Geology, C. S. Prosser; Horticulture, V. H. Davis; Industrial Arts,
W. A. Knight; Mathematics, C. J. West; Mechanical Engineering, Horace
Judd; Pathology, Jonathan Forman; Physics, F. C. Blake; Physiology
(General) R. J. Seymour; Physiology (Medical), Clayton McPeek; Public
Health and Sanitation, E. R. Hayhurst; Zoology and Entomology, J. S.
Hine.

THE OHIO JOURNAL OF SCIENCE is to be considered as a continuation of
THE OHIO NATURALIST. It is hoped that with the wider field covered,
it may interest a much larger number of the scientific people of the
state, and be financially supported so that it may soon develop into a
journal of high standard. It is the intention of the present Editors,
with the large field before them, to publish results of research as
well as articles of general interest in the advancement of Science.
On the natural history side the aim at present will be to pay more
especial attention to the biology, geology and geography of Ohio, but
articles dealing with any other region will be acceptable.

  The Editors for the present year are as follows:
      John H. Schaffner—Editor.
      James S. Hine—Associate Editor (Business).
      Frederick W. Ives—Associate Editor (Subscriptions).

                                        JOHN H. SCHAFFNER.




THE MAKING OF A PHOTOGRAPHIC OBJECTIVE.

Being a Description of a Course in Applied Optics Offered at
the Emerson McMillin Observatory of the Ohio State University.


H. C. LORD.

Photography, in its more serious phase, has taken an important place
in almost every field of human activity while in its lighter mood,
through the development of the “Kodak” and the roll film, is giving us
one of our most delightful pastimes. As a condition for the best work,
a high grade lens is a necessity and especially so for those extremely
short exposures required in the photography of rapidly moving objects.
It often happens that some of the most perfect and at the same time
most difficult specimens of optical design are found on cameras so
small that they can be easily carried in one’s coat pocket. These so
called anastigmats furnish to the optician a difficult and yet at the
same time most fascinating problem for mathematical investigation.
Thousands of photographic objectives are placed on the market every
year, yet though almost every branch of engineering is covered by
our technical schools, I know of no place outside of Germany where a
student can be instructed in the design and construction of a simple
photographic objective. Professor Silvanus P. Thompson in his inaugural
address as President of the British Optical Convention held in London
in 1912, states: “In the Universities and Colleges the only people who
are learning Optics are merely taking it as a part of Physics for the
sake of passing an examination for a degree, and care nothing for the
application of Optics in the industries. They are being taught Optics
by men who are not opticians, who never ground a lens or calculated
even an achromatic doublet, who never worked an opthalmoscope or
measured a cylindrical lens.” Further on he speaks as follows: “What
is wanted is an establishment where the whole atmosphere is one of
optical interest; where theory and practice go hand in hand; where the
mathematician will himself grind lenses and measure their performance
on the test bench; where braincraft will be married to handcraft;
where precision, whether in computation or workmanship, will be the
dominating ambition.”

Some four years before the above quotations were written, the author
started to work up a course in Optics which should aim, not only to
give to the student a knowledge of the fundamental theory of lenses,
but should also apply those principles to the methods of optical design
and thus enable him to compute the curves of the component lenses of a
photographic objective. This has now been fairly well worked out and is
given in the Arts college under the official titles “Astronomy, 107,
108, 109 and 110.” The basis of this course is “A System of Applied
Optics,” by H. Dennis Taylor, the inventor of the Cooke lens. This
splendid volume develops, from the standpoint of geometric optics, a
complete discussion of the formation of an image by a combination of
any number of lenses, but does not apply the methods and formulae there
developed to the actual design of a photographic objective. The writer
of this paper was, therefore, compelled to work out this part of the
theory for himself and, as he had always felt that all mathematics
should ultimately end in arithmetic and that all arithmetic should
ultimately end in doing something, he resolved at the outset that
the course should end in laboratory work in the actual computation,
grinding and polishing of lenses. As to how well this has succeeded,
I will let the illustrations which accompany this article speak for
themselves. Suffice it to say that the half tone cuts were made from
five by seven enlargements from negatives, one and three quarters by
two and one-eighth inches, taken with a lens _designed_ and _built_
at this observatory and working at an aperture of F six. A peculiar
feature of this lens is that it is composed of four lenses all cut
from the same piece of crown glass. This lens beautifully illustrates
the importance of adding to the theoretical side of the course, the
practical work in the laboratory in construction and testing as this
lens, though in the main satisfactory, has one serious defect and a
defect which is very instructive in that it shows that at a certain
point in the design, the theory was weak and needed to be extended and
enlarged. It should be stated that this theoretical investigation is
now completed and ready to be put to the test of practice.

This Observatory possesses a well equipped instrument shop, which was
used for the practical side of this work and it has seemed to me that
a description of how we used the ordinary tools of a machine shop, of
what special appliances we were compelled to make, and how we finally
ground and polished our lenses would be of general interest. These
methods do not pretend to be the best, nor those actually employed by
the manufacturer, but they do illustrate how a lens can be made and how
a little ingenuity will enable one if he has the standard tools of a
machine shop to carry out almost any kind of experimental work.

As a preliminary to this, a brief outline of the problem before the
lens designer may be of interest. A simple lens consists of a piece of
glass bounded by either plane or spherical surfaces as these, except
in large reflecting surfaces, are the only kind that can be made with
sufficient accuracy. Such a lens would have a great many defects or
errors and would be unable to give a sharp image on the photographic
plate unless stopped down to a very small aperture. By changing the
radii of the surfaces, and the thickness of the lens, the designer can
vary these errors, but after all is said and done he can do but little
to improve the single lens. He then combines lenses of different forms
and of different kinds of glass into a single objective, in this way
making the positive errors of some of the lenses balance the negative
errors of the others, until he arrives at a combination which is more
or less perfect according to his skill as a designer. How this is
accomplished is far beyond the limits of this paper, so I will now
proceed to the mechanical side of the problem.

The first consideration is the glass; of course it must be what is
known as optical glass and its selection is really part of the work of
the designer. Optical glass is nothing more than a very perfect kind
of glass which has been exquisitely annealed. You are all familiar
with the intense green of window glass when seen edgewise; a piece of
white paper will hardly be changed in color when seen through twelve
inches of a good optical crown. The best optical glass is not made in
this country, but must be purchased from either Schott & Gen. of Jena
or Mantois of France. The Jena glass has become very celebrated and
most of the lens makers state that their lenses are made out of it and
as a consequence most people think that Jena glass means a certain
kind, while, as a matter of fact, their catalogue for 1909 shows about
seventy different varieties. These differ in optical qualities and
chemical composition, and cost from about a dollar to five dollars a
pound, with a few special varieties costing as much as fifteen dollars.
This glass comes in slabs, but will be cut by the makers with either a
diamond saw or a sand saw, the purchaser paying for the “saw dust.”

[Illustration: FIG. 1]

[Illustration: FIG. 2]

The slabs that were used here were 2" × 6" × ½" and the first operation
was to cut from these round disks a little larger than the finished
lens. This was accomplished in the following manner and is illustrated
in Fig. 1. In the chuck of a drill speeder on a Barnes drill press was
placed a ¼" steel rod which carried at its lower end a copper tube,
A, which was steadied at the bottom by a steel washer, bored to a
loose fit to the tube, and clamped to the glass as shown. Number 40
Carborundum was used and lubricated with _plenty of water_. The tube
must be lifted frequently to allow the abrasive to flow to the cutting
edge. This is done so often that it seems almost a continuous motion of
lifting and pressing down again, the tool resting on the glass hardly
more than two or three seconds at a time. The cutting may be done at
such a speed as to allow of a slight heating. As soon as the tube has
cut itself about a sixteenth of an inch into the glass, the guiding
washer may be removed and the glass will then act as its own guide. A
disk about one inch in diameter and a half of an inch thick could be
cut out in a little over a half of an hour. At B Fig. 1 is shown one
of the uncut slabs and at C and D two that are about used up. Though
working rather slowly this proved quite satisfactory though wasteful
of glass as it cut a rather wide scarf, copper must be used; brass was
tried but the wear was so great as to render it almost useless while
the copper shows almost none.

As these disks are cut out they are not only cone shaped but the edges
are very rough so that the next operation was to grind these to smooth
and true circular disks. This was done on a Wells tool grinder shown
in Fig. 2, which was slowed way down by placing a large pulley on the
counter shaft. The glass to be ground was held by cementing it with
pitch onto a piece of brass rod which in turn was held in the drawing
collet of the head A. A special wheel B, made by the Norton people
for grinding the rims of spectacle lenses, was used and the machine
slowed until the wheel would keep wet when running against a sponge,
C, resting in water. The glass disk was in this way kept dripping and
heating entirely prevented. The grinding was then carried out just as
with any other material and the edge was made beautifully smooth and
true in a few minutes. The beauty of pitch as a cement for holding the
glass is that a slight heating will soften it so that the disk can be
shifted to any position and then a dash of cold water clamps it in
place and at the same time the pitch will slowly yield to the slightest
pressure so that in a few minutes the glass is entirely free from
strain. In manufacturing this sort of work is done with a diamond and
is of course done much more quickly.

The disks were thick enough to make two lenses each so we sawed them
into two as illustrated in Fig. 3. A is an old polishing head upon
which was mounted a pulley at one end and a copper disk, B, at the
other, the disk being held between large washers. C is a cast iron box
fastened to an arm, D, hinged at E and kept pressed against the copper
disk by a cord passing over two pulleys on the ceiling. This made a
most excellent automatic feed. The glass to be split was fastened to
a block of pine with pitch and the wood held in the iron box, C, with
wedges. Number 40 Carborundum was used with plenty of water and the
glass was cut through faster than a power hack saw would cut through
steel. The glass should be cut half way through and then reversed so
that the final break will come in the middle and thus prevent the edges
from spawling off. The chief defect of this machine was the way it
scattered emery.

[Illustration: FIG. 3]

The disks are now ready for the grinding which is done on the machine
on the right of Fig. 3, which consists simply of a vertical spindle
run by a quarter twist belt from the counter shaft against the wall.
The end of this spindle is tapered at the upper end to receive the
grinding tool or laps, shown on the table in Fig. 5 which also shows
the spindle raised so that the grinding lap is seen above the tin box,
C, which surrounds the spindle to catch the abrasive that is thrown off
in grinding. The glass is first smoothed down on a flat lap until it is
of equal thickness at all points as measured by a micrometer when it is
ready to be ground to the proper curves. For this purpose the spherical
laps, shown in Fig. 5, are turned in the special machine illustrated in
Fig. 4. The compound rest of an old Seller’s lathe was removed and in
its place, on the cross slide of the carriage, was mounted the sphere
turning rest. This consists of a base, A, in which the slide, B, is
so mounted that it can be rotated about the center, C, by turning the
milled head, D, which carries a worm at the opposite end. E is the
tool post with the cutting tool T and L the lap to be turned. A hole
was drilled at C into which was fitted a round piece of steel the
upper end being pointed and then half cut away like a center reamer.
This was used in finding the zero; the rod, pointed end up, was placed
in the hole at C and the cutting tool adjusted against the flattened
side. The zero position is then determined by measuring, with an inside
micrometer, the distance from the tool post to a stop placed at the
end of the slide B. By adding to or subtracting from the zero reading
of the micrometer the length of the radius of the grinding lap, the
tool post may be set to the proper position for either a convex or a
concave surface. This, however, is only approximate, for these laps
must be made with the highest possible accuracy. After sufficient cuts
have been taken to give a spherical surface, the radius is carefully
measured with a special spherometer and the error in the radius
corrected by changing the position of the cutting tool by an amount
calculated from the readings of the spherometer. This spherometer we
were compelled to build as we could find none of sufficient accuracy on
the market and it is described in a note at the end of this article.

[Illustration: FIG. 4]

[Illustration: FIG. 5]

In Fig. 4, R is simply a steady rest made with the large overhang
to allow the slide B to swing under it in turning a convex surface.
Two master laps, male and female, must be made and carefully ground
together. Every effort should be taken to make these as accurate as
possible since upon these depends the goodness of our lens. This
special tool is easy to make and leaves nothing to be desired in its
operation. Detail drawings and directions for making it are given in a
note at the end.

We now come to the grinding or lapping of the lenses themselves. This
is done in a lap turned as above and carefully fitted to the master
laps and which must be trued from time to time as the work progresses.
This lapping of glass is entirely different from the lapping of metals
in that, while in metals the lap is to be kept almost free from the
abrasive, in glass the lap must be freely supplied with emery and water
or deep scratches will result. The best way to apply the emery is with
a paint brush; the brush, saturated with emery, being held in front of
the lens as it is ground. The lens may be held in the hand or cemented
to a disk of brass having a center hole drilled in the back in which is
placed a pointed piece of steel held in the hand, the lens being free
to rotate about the pointed steel holder. Of course where the lens has
to be ground to a definite thickness it must be held by hand. Flour of
emery was used to rough grind though coarser grades would have worked
faster. The final smooth grinding was done with a special fine emery
made for this purpose by Bausch and Lomb. Great care must be taken in
the grinding to keep the lens as nearly centered as possible. A lens is
said to be centered when the line which joins the centers of curvature
of the surfaces passes through the center of figure. Obviously if a
double convex lens could be ground to a knife edge it would be centered
but if this were done the edge would be almost certain to crumble
in the final polishing and deep scratches result. The centering of
a convex lens can be watched by keeping the edge as nearly uniform
of thickness as possible with a concave lens, if the original blank
is made larger than necessary and care is taken to make the sides
parallel, the centering can be watched by keeping a flat edge of _equal
width_ around the concave portion, the lens being placed back on the
flat tool, from time to time, as the work progresses. If care is used
the lens need be made but little larger than the finished size to allow
for the final accurate centering to be described later.

After being smooth ground the lens is beautifully smooth and velvety
to the touch but is just as much ground glass as ever, that is, it is
absolutely opaque. We now come to the polishing. This is done with
specially prepared rouge and only an excessively small amount of glass
is taken off. Lord Rayleigh in a paper on “Polishing of Glass Surfaces”
read before the British Optical Convention held in 1905, states: “I
started with a finely ground surface, rather more finely ground I think
than is used in practice, and I found that in order to obtain a pretty
good polish it was necessary to remove a weight of glass, corresponding
to a depth of about 6 wavelengths. I do not pretend that such a polish
would satisfy the requirements of commerce; probably the 6 would have
to be raised to 10 or 12 in order to get to the bottom of the deepest
pits.” When it is remembered that a wave length is about the fifty
thousandth part of an inch we realize how very delicate such lapping
must be. For this work the lap is covered with pitch which has been
brought to the proper degree of hardness either by boiling, to harden
it or by adding asfalt varnish to soften it. The proper degree of
hardness is very important and must be adjusted to the temperature of
the room. Obviously if the pitch is too soft it will not hold its shape
and it will be impossible to hold the polishing tool to the proper
radius. I have put three different curves on a lens about an inch in
diameter in a few minutes and it had to go back on the grinding machine
before it could be finished.

The polishing tool is prepared as follows: A disk of pitch, about ¼"
thick, is cast by pouring it in a mold made by a strip of brass bent
to a circle, the ends clamped with a tool maker’s clamp, and rested on
a piece of cold cast iron which has been planed smooth. This should be
of such size that when bent to the proper shape it can be molded over
a tool similar to the grinding tool but with a radius changed by about
the thickness of the pitch. This tool is then heated and painted with
a stick of pitch, the disk is warmed, and the two pressed together,
when cooled the pitch will stick tight to the iron but will be far from
a smooth surface. This and the master tool of the opposite curvature
are placed in warm water and pressed together and at the same time one
slowly rotated, one about the other. When a good fit is secured they
are cooled and a number of small holes, about 1-8" in diameter, are
drilled all over the pitch to distribute the abrasive, which of course
spoils the surface and the tool must be again pressed. This pressing
to shape must be done repeatedly and requires great care and some
practice in order to have the pitch come to the exact opposite of the
pressing tool. The most important thing is to do the pressing slowly
and in fact in the whole process of this work one must never get in a
hurry. Ritchey, in his memoir on the construction of the great 60" at
Mt. Wilson, recommends covering the pitch with beeswax, and for quicker
and poorer work a cloth polisher may be used, the cloth being a special
felt and cemented to the cast iron tool with a thin layer of pitch.

The abrasive is rouge or red oxide of iron and its preparation is
fully described in the above mentioned work by Ritchey. We purchased
the anhydrous red oxide of iron from Merck & Co. This was mixed with
plenty of water in the jars shown at E, Fig. 5. The rouge will rapidly
precipitate, the coarse particles falling to the bottom, and leaving
clear water above the precipitated rouge. The upper two-thirds of the
rouge will be almost perfect and will give a beautiful polish when
carefully siphoned off. This should be kept in tightly corked bottles,
one of the best things is a horse radish jar as this has a place for
the handle of the brush in the glass stopper, and all dust and grit
can be easily washed off before the jar is opened. For polishing, the
lens is cemented to a handle at whose end is a piece of brass turned to
fit the lens in the sphere turning machine already described. Even in
a small lens the polishing tool must be run slowly, the speeds of our
machines run from 170 to 300 revolutions per minute and the fastest can
seldom be used. The reason of this is that the lens fits the polisher
so perfectly that almost a perfect vacuum is formed and the lens hugs
the polished so closely that it is impossible to hold it in small sizes
by hand alone and in the case of a convex surface, if the cavity is
carried clear out to the edge of the glass disk, this may be broken
simply by the friction due to this grip of the glass and pitch. Fig. 5
shows a horizontal polishing head at B and a vertical one at C. There
is little choice except that for convex surfaces B seems the best, as
it can be run faster, while for concave C seems better.

The lenses are now ready to be centered, that is, the circumference so
turned that the line which joins the centers of curvature of the two
spherical surfaces shall pass through the center of figure. In order
to accomplish this, the lens is first cleaned from the pitch used to
cement it to the handle used in holding the lens for polishing. For a
long time I could find no way of doing this satisfactorily when pitch
was the cement; finally, I laid my troubles before Dr. A. M. Bleile,
Head of the Department of Physiology, and he suggested to first soak
the lens in lard and then wash it in benzol (C_{6}H_{6}). This worked
like magic though the first time I tried it I used some lard that had
been heated with some pitch in it which made the lard very soft in fact
almost as soft as it could be and yet not be an oil, and this same lard
was used over and over again. The action is rather peculiar; the lard
does not apparently effect the pitch at all but after a few minutes in
the benzene it all flakes off and leaves the lens perfectly clean. The
actual centering is then carried out on the grinding machine shown in
Fig. 2; A holder, D, whose front face has been turned in the spherical
turning machine to fit one of the surfaces of the lens, is held in the
head A. If the lens be cemented to this with a thin coat of pitch,
it is obvious that the surface of the lens next to the holder will
have its center of curvature coincide with the axis of rotation of
the spindle of the head, A, but the center of curvature of the other
lens surface will probably fall outside of this axis. A lamp, L, has
a tin chimney with a pin hole in it turned towards the lens, this
pin hole forming a brilliant point of light, an image of which is
formed by each surface and reflected by the total reflecting prism,
P, into the telescope, T, where it is seen through the eyepiece. If
the centers of curvature of both surfaces do not accurately coincide
with the axis of rotation of the head, A, the images of the pin hole
will describe circles as this axis is rotated. The back surface will
of course be centered if the layer of the pitch used as cement is of
uniform thickness which will generally be the case if the work has
been carefully done; but in any case the image formed by it should
be examined. If the front surface is out of center, as it generally
will be, the holder should be warmed and the lens shifted, care being
used to keep it tight against the surface of the holder as it is being
shifted. As soon as both images remain stationary as the head, A, is
rotated, the lens is fed against the wheel, B, and ground true and to
size. This worked beautifully and the tests were wonderfully sensitive.
As soon as the component lenses of the objective have all been thus
centered, they are ready to be assembled in the cell or shutter in
which they are to be used; but as this is simply a matter of careful
machine work, I need not describe it further.

I know of no literature on the grinding of small lenses though the
following memoirs on the making of large reflecting telescopes should
be in the hands of any one interested in this work:

=On the Construction of a Five-foot Equatorial Reflecting Telescope.=
      By A. A. Common, LL. D., F. R. S.
      Memoirs of the Royal Astronomical Society, Vol. L., 1890-91.

=On the Construction of a Silvered Glass Telescope,
      Fifteen and a Half Inches in Aperture, and its
      Use in Celestial Photography.=
     By Henry Draper, M. D.,
     Smithsonian Contributions to Knowledge, Vol. 34.

=On the Modern Reflecting Telescope and the
      Making and Testing of Optical Mirrors.=
     By George W. Ritchey.
     Smithsonian Contributions to Knowledge, Vol. 34.


NOTE 1—A SPHEROMETER FOR SHORT RADII.

[Illustration: FIG. 6]

In Fig. 6, A is a regular Brown & Sharpe Micrometer Head with the
measuring point ground to an angle of 60° and slightly rounded; B is a
round steel base all machined at one setting in which the micrometer
head is clamped by a set screw not shown.

Let r be the radius of the spherical surface, MNO, and we will have at
once r = (a^2 + d^2) / 2d. The advantage of this form of spherometer
is that it is very easy to make the point of the micrometer exactly
central with the base and the value of 2a can be accurately determined
by means of an ordinary micrometer calliper. For a convex surface,
2a should obviously be the inside diameter of the base, B.

In using the instrument, two tables, one for concave and one for
convex surfaces, should be prepared; these tables to give the power in
dioptres for each one thousandth of an inch in the value of d. Using
the American Optical Co.’s Standard Index, namely, μ equal to 1.5000
and one dioptre as being the power of a lens of 40 inches focus, we
have, for a plano lens, p = 4/f = 40d/(a^2 + d^2) since f = r/(μ-1).

The advantage of forming the table in dioptres in place of radii
directly is that the tabular differences are small at all parts of the
table so that interpolation can be readily done and this is not the
case in tables which give the radii directly.

If upon measuring the radius of the tool or lap being turned in the
sphere turning machine, Fig. 4, with this spherometer, the tool is
found to be in error by an amount Δp this may be corrected by changing
the position of the cutting tool by an amount 20 (Δp / p^2).


NOTE 2—CROSS SECTION OF THE SPHERE TURNING REST.

[Illustration: FIG. 7]

In Fig. 7 is shown a cross section of the sphere turning rest further
illustrated in Fig. 4. In machining this the following suggestions
should be followed. The piece M should be cast with a lug projecting
from the face PQ to chuck it by and all the turning done at one
chucking. It should be made a close fit to R and bolted tight against
DG and ED´ with the bolts S_{3} and S_{4}, clearance being given along
the line HF. To compensate for ware the face DG and ED´ can be releaved
from time to time with a file. The base N, should be planed along AB,
where it fastens to the cross slide of the carriage, then bolted to
a face plate of the lathe and finished, care being used to leave the
setting of the compound rest unchanged between machining the faces CD
and C´D´ of the pieces M and N. The dove tail on R should be first
planed and then this bolted to a face plate and the boss GHFE and the
faces KG and EL turned at one setting. If these directions are followed
almost no hand work will be needed. W is a brass worm wheel held by
screws not shown and J is the sliding tool post clamped at X with the
tool at K´.




NOTES ON THE ZYGNEMALES.[A]


EDGAR NELSON TRANSEAU.

The following notes principally concerning North American Zygnemales
are based on a study of the specimens accumulated in the course
of eight years collecting in central Illinois; a collection made
by Mr. Charles Bullard, of Cambridge, Mass., in Massachusetts
and New Hampshire; the specimens distributed in the Phycotheca
Boreali-Americana by Collins, Holden and Setchell; the specimens
distributed in American Algae, by Miss Josephine E. Tilden; the
specimens in the U. S. National Herbarium; and small collections sent
me by Professor Farlow, Miss Tilden, Professor A. B. Klugh, Professor
D. S. Johnson and Miss Grace Stone. They have been compared with the
species distributed by Wittrock and Nordstedt in their “Algae Aquae
dulcis exsiccatae,” and other valuable European and South American
specimens sent me by Professors O. Borge and O. Nordstedt.

In determining almost any species of the Zygnemales it is absolutely
essential that the specimens show both the vegetative cells and the
mature spores. With the exception of a few species of Mougeotia the
spores are colored either yellow, brown, or blue when they are mature.
The characteristic markings of the median spore wall do not develop
usually until this color appears. Consequently it is useless to attach
names to vegetative specimens based on dimensions and number of
chromatophores. Keys based on such characters are not only useless, but
misleading.

Judging from my experience in Illinois it is highly probable that the
list of North American forms will be considerably augmented, when
intensive studies have been made at localities in the Southern United
States. The most satisfactory method of collecting these forms is to
take samples from the various ponds and streams at regular intervals
of ten days, or two weeks, throughout the growing season. Many of the
species show local variations and considerable experience is needed
before many of the forms can be satisfactorily classified. The writer
has in course of preparation an illustrated key to the group, in which
figures for all of the species will be published.


=DEBARYA= Wittrock.

This genus is in many respects the most generalized of all the
_Zygnemales_. It is distinguished by three important characteristics:
(1) the entire contents of the gametangia enter into the making of the
zygospore; (2) the zygospore is formed in the conjugating tube and
is not cut off from the other parts of the gametangia by partition
walls; (3) as the gametes move toward the tube during conjugation,
their place is taken by a secretion of cellulose, which renders the
gametangia solid and highly refractive. This secretion also occurs when
a vegetative cell forms an aplanospore.


=Debarya glyptosperma= Wittrock.

This species has been recorded for America. It is not uncommon in
Massachusetts and has also been found in Minnesota and Florida. In
P. B.-A. No. 808 from Boswell, California is a somewhat smaller
variety with blue spores associated with _Zygnema peliosporum_ Wittr.
The spores are common in the material and the vegetative cells and
filaments occasional. Following is a diagnosis for this variety:

Var. =formosa= nov. var. Cellulis vegetativis 7.5-9µ latis;
zygosporis 24-30µ × 30-42µ, caeruleis; ceterum ut in typo.

Vegetative cells 7.5-9µ in diameter, zygospores 24-30µ × 30-42µ steel
blue, otherwise like the type.


=Debarya americana= nov. sp.

Cellulis vegetativis 9-12µ × 27-120µ, ad dissepimenta constrictis;
chromatophoris cum pyrenoidibus 2; cellulis fructiferis,
10-14µ × 75-180µ; zygosporis ovoideis vel quadrato-ovoideis,
20-40µ × 30-40µ, angulis rotundatis, productis, vel retusis;
parthenosporis 15-20µ × 20-30µ, oblique ellipticis, cum polis retusis;
mesosporio subtiliter et irregulariter verrucoso, maturitate
luteo-brunneo.

Vegetative cells 9-12µ × 27-120µ constricted at the end walls,
chromatophore with two pyrenoids; fertile cells 10-14µ × 75-180µ;
zygospores ovoid or quadrately ovoid, 20-40µ × 30-40µ, with angles
rounded, produced, or retuse; parthenospores 15-20µ-× 20-30µ
unilaterally ellipsoid with retuse ends; median spore wall minutely and
irregularly verrucose, yellow-brown at maturity.

This species was collected by Professor A. B. Klugh, Kingston, Ontario.
It is the material upon which the Ontario record for _Mougeotia
calcarea_ (Cleve) Wittr. is based. Of special interest is the
chromatophore with two pyrenoids, which although an axile plate is
distinctly two-lobed and forms an easy transition to the next species,
in which the chromatophore resembles _Zygnema_. Type in herb. E. N. T.
Collection No. 2950.


=Debarya decussata= nov. sp.

Cellulis vegetativis 16-20µ × 25-50µ cylindraceis; chromatophoris
asteroidiis duobus, singulis cum pyrenoidibus (ut in Zygnemate);
zygosporis vel ovoideis, vel irregularibus, 24-30µ × 30-48µ cum angulis
vel rotundatis, vel retusis, vel productis; aplanosporis uno latere
ovoideis, 17-25µ × 20-40µ; parthenosporis 15-20µ × 20-30µ; membrana
media sporarum scrobiculata, luteo-brunnea; akinetis ad dissepimenta
constrictis, membrana subcrassa et glabra, 18-20µ × 20-36µ.

Vegetative cells 16-20µ × 25-50µ cylindrical; chromatophores two,
stellate, each with a pyrenoid (as in Zygnema); zygospores ovoid,
quadrate-ovoid, or irregular, 24-30µ × 30-48µ, with rounded, retuse,
or produced angles; aplanospores unilaterally ovoid, 17-25µ × 20-40µ;
parthenospores 15-20µ × 20-30µ; median spore walls scrobiculate,
yellow-brown; akinetes with smooth heavy walls, 18-20µ × 20-30µ.

Type in herb, E. N. T. Collections No. 1177, 1939, 1949, 2686 and
2918. I have specimens from several localities in central Illinois;
Williamsport, Pa.; Minnesota; Mackinaw, Mich. and Kingston, Ontario.

This form is of great interest because of its resemblance, in the
vegetative condition, to _Zygnema decussatum_ (Vauch.) Transeau.
Also because it shows not only the zygospores, but aplanospores and
parthenospores. In all cases the secretion of cellulose accompanies
the process of spore formation. The unilaterally placed aplanospores
are strikingly different from those formed by the Zygnemas. In some
of the Illinois ponds it regularly produces only zygospores, in other
ponds from which I have collections covering a period of several
years it fruited only asexually, producing aplanospores and akinetes.
But several of the collections show all the forms of reproduction in
different cells of the same filament.

The characteristics of this species suggest that the peculiar _Zygnema
reticulatum_, which was described by Hallas in 1895[B], is in reality
a _Debarya_. The fact that the reproductive cells become filled with
cellulose, that the aplanospores are very irregular in form and that
the vegetative cells contain as high as seven chromatophores, are all
in harmony with this idea. On this basis it is also easy to understand
the most notable peculiarity of the species—that spores derived from
cells with several chromatophores produce two or three sporelings.

With the addition of the two new American species and this Danish
species =Debarya reticulata= (Hallas) nov. comb. the description
of the genus needs to be modified as follows:

Vegetative cells cylindrical or constricted at the ends, varying
from 1-16 diameters in length; chromatophore varying from an axile
plate with two or more pyrenoids to stellate chromatophores, each
with a central pyrenoid. Reproduction by zygospores formed of the
complete contents of the gametangia; not cut off from the gametangia
by partition walls; but in the process of conjugation, as the gametes
pass into the conjugating tube, their place is taken by a secretion of
cellulose. Aplanospores occupying only part of the sporogenous cell,
the remainder being filled with cellulose. All spores variable in form.
Parthenospores and akinetes occur not infrequently in some of the
species. The walls of the aplanospores and parthenospores resemble the
zygospores of the same species in their markings.

There are now eleven described species belonging to this genus. _D.
immersa_ W. West and _D. africana_ G. S. West bear a close resemblance
to _Mongeotia sphaerocarpa_ Wolle. _D. Hardyi_ G. S. West has much
the same appearance as _Mongeotia viridis_ (Kutz) Wittrock. _D.
desmidiodes_ W. & G. S. West, _D. calospora_ (Palla) W. & G. S. West,
_D. reticulata_, _D. americana_, and _D. decussata_ have characters
in common with the Zygnemas. _D. glyptosperma_ has the vegetative
characters common to several of the species, but its spores are quite
unique among the _Zygnemales_.


=ZYGNEMA= Agardh.

=Z. pectinatum= (Vauch.) Agardh.

This is probably common in the eastern half of the United States at
least. In Illinois along with the type occurs the variety _conspicuum_
(Hass.) Kirchner, and a variety with large spores. This latter variety
in fact is more common than the type.

var. =crassum= nov. var. Cellulis vegetativis 30-40µ × 20-80µ;
zygosporis 40-55µ × 50-60µ, ceterum ut in typo.

Vegetative cells 30-40µ × 20-80µ; zygospores 40-55µ × 50-60µ, otherwise
like the type. Type in herb. E. N. T. Collections No. 2350, 2392, 2660,
2685.


=Z. ericetorum= (Kütz) Hansgirg.

Professor G. S. West has studied the reproduction of this species and
finds that it is a true Zygnema and that the description and figure by
De Bary, which shows the cutting off of two special gametangia before
the union of the gametes is at fault, consequently there is no longer
any need of maintaining the genus _Zygogonium_ Kützing.


=Z. peliosporum= Wittrock.

Specimens of this species have been distributed under the name of _Z.
chalybeospernum_ Hansgirg, in P. B.-A. No. 808 from Boswell, Calif. (N.
L. Gardner); Amer. Alg. No. 156 from Ft. Collins, Colo. (J. H. Cowan);
and Amer. Alg. No. 392 from Vancouver, B. C. (J. E. Tilden). _Z.
chalybeospermum_ has the median wall smooth, but the spores of all of
the above specimens have distinctly scrobiculate median walls. In size
the specimens show a somewhat greater variation in dimensions than has
been recorded for European localities.


=Z. cruciatum= (Vauch) Agardh.

Specimens of this species have been found at Fath Pond, north of
Coffeen, Ill., in which both zygospores and aplanospores occurred in
abundance. The aplanospores fill or slightly enlarge the vegetative
cells as in _Z. Collinsianum_ Transeau,[C] but the ends of the spores
are usually more nearly truncate, 34-50µ × 30-80µ. At Casey, Ill., a
variety with the same dimensions but steel blue spores occurs in the
old Ice Plant Pond.

var. =caeruleum= nov. var. Cellulis vegetativis et sporis ut
in typo, sed membrana media sporarum caerulea.

Vegetative cells and spores as in the type, except that the
median spore wall is steel blue. Type in Collection E. N. T.
No. 495.


=Zygnema stellinum= (Müller) Agardh.

The specimen distributed under the name _Z. insigne_ (Hass.) Kütz. in
the P. B.-A. No. 457, from Chestnut Hill, Mass. (G. F. Moore), belongs
to this species as shown by the scattered mature spores. This species
is common everywhere in central Illinois. In the U. S. Natl. Herb, is a
specimen from Baltimore Co., Md., (J. D. Smith). In Amer. Alg. No. 157,
a specimen from St. Paul, Minn., (J. E. Tilden) shows both zygospores
and aplanospores. The aplanospores are cylindric ovoid in form,
occupying the entire cell 30-33µ × 40-88µ, median wall scrobiculate.


=Zygnema cylindricum= nov. sp.

Cellulis vegetativis 28-33µ × 28-66µ; zygosporis incognitis;
aplanosporis cylindricis vel tumido-cylindricis, 30-33µ × 24-58µ,
sporangia complentibus; membrana media brunnea scrobiculata.

Vegetative cells 28-33µ × 28-66µ; zygospores unknown; aplanospores
cylindric or tumid-cylindric, 30-33µ × 24-58µ, filling the sporangia,
median wall brown, scrobiculate. Type in Herb. E. N. T. No. 1164, 1177.

This species is not uncommon in ponds, and pools throughout central
Illinois. It was at first classified as aplanosporic material of _Z.
stellinum_ (Müller) Agardh. On going over the specimens in all my
collections, however, it was found that in no case were the filaments
containing the aplanospores connected with the filaments containing
zygospores. This must be the final test of the identity of the species,
as it occurs in some collections alone, sometimes associated only with
fruiting _Zygnema pectinatum_, and sometimes with _Z. stellinum_.


=Zygnema rhynchonema= Hansg.

In a collection of algae made at the Minnesota Seaside Station,
Vancouver Island, B. C., in 1901, by Professor Tilden, is a form which
perhaps belongs here. The vegetative cells are from 22-28µ in diameter,
and 32-52µ in length, while the European specimens are described as
16-20µ in diameter and 2-6 diameters long. The Vancouver specimens are
producing both aplanospores (globose, 24-26µ in diam.), and zygospores
(ovoid 24-28µ × 36-44µ) by the union of gametes through the partition
wall separating the two gametangia. The specimens show some evidences
of being in an abnormal condition.


=SPIROGYRA= Link.

=S. Juergensii= Kützing.

The specimen in P. B.-A. No. 510 from Knightsville, R. I., distributed
under the name of _S. longata_ (Vauch) Kütz. with cell diameter 27-30µ,
and ellipsoid spores 30-33µ in diameter, fertile cells enlarged,
evidently belongs to this species. The spores of _S. longata_ are
distinctly ovoid with rounded ends. In the Illinois specimens the
spores of _S. Juergensii_ frequently occur with diameters up to 33µ.

=S. varians= (Hass.) Kütz.

The varieties _scrobiculata_ Stockman and _minor_ Teodoresco have not
been reported from America. They both occur rarely in Illinois. The
latter I have also seen in material collected by Mr. Charles Bullard,
at Lynnfield, Mass. The former is characterized by its scrobiculate
spores, the latter by its smaller dimensions throughout. In my
herbarium _S. varians scrobiculata_ is represented in Collections No.
1799, and 1881; and _S. varians minor_ in Collection No. 2951.

=S. Borgeana= nov. sp.

Cellulis vegetativis 30-35µ × 50-200µ, dissepimentis planis,
chromatophoris singulis anfractibus arctis 1.5-5; cellulis
fractiferis altero latere inflatis, altero latere (in quo conjugatio
sequitur) rectis; zygosporis ellipticis, 33-40µ × 54-70µ, membrana
media flava, glabra.

Vegetative cells 30-35µ × 50-200µ, end walls plane, 1 chromatophore
making 1.5-5 turns; fertile cells inflated on the outer side, straight
on the conjugating side; zygospores ellipsoid 33-40µ × 54-70µ, median
wall yellow, smooth. Type in herb. E. N. T. Coll. No. 1883, 1890.
Charleston, Illinois.

This species bears some resemblance to a form of _S. varians_ figured
by Professor Borge.[D] It differs from his figure in that the
conjugating side of the fertile cells is not at all swollen, and the
dimensions are somewhat larger. If this form had been found but once
it would have been passed over as a variation intermediate between _S.
Juergensii_ and _S. varians_. But it has been found several successive
years in a small stream south, and at a small pond west of Charleston,
Illinois.


=S. lutetiana= Petit.

So far as I am aware no specimens of this species have been found in
America. The Illinois record in my list[E] is an error. The P. B.-A.
specimen labelled _S. lutetiana_ is _S. fallax_ (Hansg.) Wille, as
shown by its often replicate cell walls, verrucose spores and the
number of chromotophores.


=S. velata= Nordstedt var. =occidentalis= Transeau.

Specimens of this variety have been distributed in the P. B.-A. No. 96,
under the name of _S. dubia_ Kütz. var. _longiarticulata_ Kütz. from
Oak Bay, Victoria, British Columbia (N. L. Gardner). The spores are for
the most part not mature but they show the characteristic scrobiculate
markings of the median wall.


=S. Lagerheimii= Wittrock.

This species is not uncommon in central Illinois. The
specimen labelled _S. communis_ in P. B.-A. No. 1416, from
Winchester, Mass., has a cell diameter over 30µ, and the
spores are ellipsoid instead of ovoid. The median spore wall
in the mature spores is punctate. Here also belongs the P. B.-A.
specimen No. 365, Falmouth, Mass. Both the vegetative cells
and the spores are considerably below the lower dimensions
for _S. porticalis_. The P. B.-A. specimen No. 1668, _S. porticalis_
var. _tenuispira_ Collins establishes this name as a synonym of
_S. Lagerheimii_. Professor Farlow has recently sent me a
specimen of this species from Chocorua, N. H.


=S. daedalea= Lagerheim.

This species has recently been found in a pond south of
Coffeen, Ill. The spores show the characteristic markings
and the dimensions are near those of the original collection.
The spores are slightly more rhomboidal than in the type
material, which I have seen. In herb. E. N. T. Collection
No. 2912, 2850.


=S. Goetzei= Schmidle.

This species previously known only from the tropics has been found in
the collection of Mr. Charles Bullard, from Wellfleet, Mass. In herb.
E. N. T. Collection No. 2954.


=S. submarina= (Collins) nov. comb.

This species was described by Collins as a variety of _S. decimina_
(Müller) Kütz, which it somewhat resembles in the form of the
vegetative cells. The spores, however, are distinctly ellipsoid, while
those of _S. decimina_ are ovoid. The dimensions are much smaller than
those of _S. decimina_. It seems better therefore to recognize this as
a distinct species. It has been collected in Massachusetts, Connecticut
and Bermuda.


=E. ellipsospora= Transeau.

Described originally from Illinois, I have seen specimens during
the past year from Maine, Massachusetts and Minnesota. Professor G.
S. West[F] described about the same time a species from Columbia,
South America, which appears to be a form of this same species. The
vegetative cells are considerably larger, the chromatophores are six
(or five) in number, and the spores are at the upper limit of size of
the North American form. As our specimens all show, a wider range of
dimensions and number of chromatophores, the South American form is
best classified as a variety under the name _S. ellipsospora_ var.
=splendida= (G. S. West) nov. comb.


=S. propria= nov. sp.

Cellulis vegetativis 60-68µ × 80-150µ, dissepimentis planis;
chromatophoris 3, anfractibus arctis .5-1; cellulis fructiferis
cylindricis; zygosporis ellipticis 42-60µ × 80-120µ; membrana media
sporarum scrobiculis irregularis ornata, luteo-brunnea.

Vegetative cells 60-68µ × 80-150µ, end walls plane; 3 chromatophores
making .5-1 turn in the cell; fertile cells cylindrical; zygospores
ellipsoid, 42-60µ × 80-120µ, median wall irregularly pitted,
yellow-brown. Type in herb. E. N. T. Coll. No. 2666. Coffeen, Illinois.

This species is very distinct in the form of its spores and their
position in the fertile cells. Lateral conjugation only has been
observed. It is possible that the number of chromatophores is more
variable, but in all the vegetative cells in which they could be
counted there were three.


=Spirogyra braziliensis= (Nordstedt) nov. comb.

Owing to the indefinite and imperfect description of _S. lineata_
Suring., the variety _Braziliensis_ Nordstedt, of which we have a
perfect description and specimens (W. & N. Alg. aq. dulc. exsicc. No.
360), should be given specific rank. Its connection with _S. lineata_
is very problematical.


=S. fluviatilis= Hilse.

In all the published descriptions of this species the spores are
described as smooth, and the number of chromatophores is given as
four. I have seen many specimens from Illinois, and collections from
the upper peninsula of Michigan (T. L. Hankinson), Minnesota (J. E.
Tilden), Hawaii (J. E. Tilden), Massachusetts (P. B.-A. No. 1217),
Pennsylvania (E. N. T.) and Guatemala (W. A. Kellerman). In all cases
the mature spores are brown and scrobiculate, and the number of
chromatophores is three or four.


=S. nova-angliae= nov. sp.

Cellulis vegetativis 50-60µ × 200-350µ, dissepimentis planis;
chromatophoris 3-5, anfractibus arctis 2.5-4.5; cellulis fructiferis
non inflatis; zygosporis ovoideis 50-65µ × 80-120µ: membrana media
sporarum reticulata et dense punctata, flava.

Vegetative cells 50-60µ × 200-350µ, end walls plane; 3-5 chromatophores
making 2.5-4.5 turns; fertile cells not inflated; zygospores ovoid
50-65µ × 80-120µ: median wall reticulate and densely punctate, yellow
in color.

This species was first found in the collections of Mr. Bullard
from Beaver Dam, Brook Pond, Natick; the pond west of Winter Pond,
Winchester; and the Middlesex Fells, Mass. Recently the same form was
found in a large prairie pond south of Coffeen, Illinois. Its position
in the genus is near _S. malmeana_ Hirn. In herb. E. N. T. Collections
No. 2952, 2953 and 2900.


=S. diluta= Wood.

I first came across this species in Mr. Bullard’s collection from
the pond west of Winter Pond, Winchester, Mass. On going over Wood’s
description, its identity with _S. diluta_ is unmistakable. The
position, color and form of the spore, and the shape of the fertile
cells is perfectly represented in Wood’s figure. The dimensions also
correspond. Wolle is responsible for confusing this species with _S.
nitida_ (Dillw.) Link, but a glance at Wood’s figure is sufficient to
show that it is very different from that species. The P. B. A. specimen
No. 513 (labelled _S. nitida_) from Bridgeport, Conn., belongs here.
Miss Grace Stone also sent me a collection of this species from near
New York City. In the U. S. National Herbarium is another specimen from
Bois Sabbi, Louisiana, April 7th, 1891, (A. B. Langlois). Recently the
species has been collected at Donnelson, Illinois, by Mr. Frank Harris.

The vegetative cells are usually shorter than in _S. nitida_, the
spores are ovoid, not ellipsoid, and the spore wall is verrucose, or
reticulate-verrucose, chestnut brown in color. In herb. E. N. T. Coll.
No. 2900.


=S. crassa= Kützing.

Var. =formosa= nov. var. Varietas gracilis, cellulis vegetativis
80-95µ × 80-270µ; zygosporis 88-100µ × 120-150µ × 70-90µ; ceterum ut in
typo.

A small variety, vegetative cells 80-95µ × 80-270µ: zygospores
88-100µ × 120-150µ × 70-90µ; otherwise similar to the type. Type in
herb. E. N. T. Coll. No. 1939. This variety occurs in a pond east of
Ashmore, Ill.


=S. submaxima= Transeau.

This species which was described from Illinois has been found with
nearly the same dimensions in the collections from Middlesex Fells, and
South Peabody Station, Mass., sent me by Mr. Chas. Bullard.


=S. micropunctata= nov. sp.

Cellulis vegetativis 30-36µ × 120-300µ, dissepimentis planis,
chromatophoris singulis anfractibus arctis 3-7; cellulis fructiferis
modo binis vel quaternis inter cellulas vegetativas distributis,
modo continuis, altero latere (in quo conjugatio sequitur) inflatis,
altero rectis; tubo conjugationis plerumque ex cellula mascula emisso;
zygosporis ellipticis 37-42µ × 57-100µ membrana media micropunctata et
lutea.

Vegetative cells 30-36µ × 120-300µ, end walls plane; 1 chromatophore
making 3-7 turns; fertile cells scattered in twos or fours among
vegetative cells, or continuous, inflated on the conjugating side,
outer side straight; conjugating tubes formed almost wholly by the
male cell, zygospores ellipsoid 37-42µ × 57-70µ, median wall minutely
punctate, yellow. Type in herb. E. N. T. Coll. No. 2470, 2953.

This species was first found in the West Big Four Pond, east of
Charleston, Illinois. It has since been found in a collection from
Chocorua, N. H., sent me by Mr. Chas. Bullard. It evidently belongs in
the _punctata_ group of the Spirogyras, but in form and markings of the
spore, and the shape of the fertile cells it is amply distinct from its
nearest allies; _S. punctiformis_ Transeau and the next species to be
described.


=S. reflexa= nov. sp.

Cellulis vegetativis 30-40µ × 120-300µ, dissepimentis planis;
chromatophoris singulis anfractibus arctis 3-8 cellulis fructiferis
binis vel quaternis inter cellulas vegetativas distributis, inflatis
et valde reflexis; tubo conjugationis ex cellula mascula emisso;
zygosporis ellipticis, 44-54µ × 90-150µ, membrana media glabra et
luteo-brunnea.

Vegetative cells 30-40µ × 120-300µ, with plane end wall; 1
chromatophore making 3-8 turns; fertile cells in groups of 2 or 4,
inflated or enlarged and strongly reflexed; conjugating tube formed by
the male cells; zygospores ellipsoid, 44-54µ × 90-150µ, median wall
smooth, yellow-brown. Type in herb. E. N. T. Collection No. 2661, 2664,
2912.

This species has been under observation for four years and has been
collected from ponds near Casey, Lerna, Coffeen and Donnellson,
Illinois. The large, smooth spores, the reflexed conjugating cells,
and the tube produced wholly by the male cells are the distinguishing
characteristics.


=S. hydrodictya= nov. sp.

Cellulis vegetativis 75-100µ × 210-360µ, dissepimentis planis,
chromatophoris 7-10, modo subrectis longitudinalibus, modo spiralibus
anfractibus arctis .1-.5; cellulis fructiferis inflatis vel
subinflatis; tubo conjugationis ex cellula mascula emisso; zygosporis
lenticularibus vel globoso-lenticularibus, 80-120µ × 110-195µ, membrana
media scrobiculis obsita, brunnea.

Vegetative cells 75-100µ × 210-360µ, end walls plane, 7-10
chromatophores, either straight, or spiral making .1-.5 turns; fertile
cells inflated or subinflated; conjugating tube formed by the male
cell; zygospores lenticular or globose-lenticular 80-120µ × 110-195µ,
median wall brown, pitted. Type in herb. E. N. T. Coll. No. 2661, 2665.
Coffeen, Illinois.

This is one of the most remarkable forms described in this genus.
It combines large size, the lenticular spore form, and the habit of
forming the conjugating tube entirely by the male cell. The conjugating
tube has walls heavier than those of any known species. Conjugation
is both lateral and scalariform, and occurs between scattered cells,
very rarely continuous for 6-8 cells. In the fruiting condition the
filaments form a mesh-work which suggests the specific name. It has
thus far been found only in the Fath Pond, north of Coffeen, Illinois.


=S. protecta= Wood.

A study of American specimens of this species from Massachusetts,
Connecticut, New Jersey, Michigan and Illinois, shows that like _S.
Grevilleana_ there are always some cells with two chromatophores. I
have twice found this species producing aplanospores.


=S. tenuissima= (Hass.) Kütz var. =rugosa= Transeau.

P. B.-A. specimen No. 456, Easton’s Pt., Newport, R. I., belongs to
this variety rather than the type, as shown by the scrobiculate spore
wall. In Mr. Bullard’s collection there are also specimens of the
variety from Pennannock, N. J., and from Spy Pond, Lake St., Arlington,
Mass.


=S. Farlowii= nov. sp.

Cellulis vegetativis 24-30µ × 70-180µ, dissepimentis replicatis;
chromatophoris singulis, rarius duobus, anfractibus arctis 2.5-6;
cellulis fructiferis inflatis (ad 39-60µ); zygosporis ellipticis, polis
plus minus acuminatis, 32-45µ × 48-93µ, membrana media glabra, lutea.

Vegetative cells 24-30µ × 70-180µ, end walls replicate; 1 (rarely 2)
chromatophore making 2.5-6 turns; fertile cells inflated to 39-60µ;
zygospores ellipsoid, ends more or less pointed, 32-45µ × 48-93µ,
median wall smooth, yellow. Type in herb. E. N. T. Coll. No. 2955,
2956, 2957.

In Mr. Bullard’s collection there are specimens of this species from
Lexington, Arlington, and Middlesex Fells, Mass. The P. B.-A. specimen
No. 362, labeled _S. Grevilleana_, from Medford, Mass., belongs here,
rather than to _S. Grevilleana_, in which the spores are distinctly
ovoid with broad rounded ends.


=S. groenlandica= Rosenvinge.

This interesting form is characterized by quadrately inflated fertile
cells, highly refractive cell walls, and unusually long cells and
spores. In Mr. Bullard’s collection there are specimens from Stony
Brook, South Framingham, Middlesex Fells, Wayside Inn, North Eastham,
and Malden Fells, Massachusetts. The P. B.-A. specimen No. 363 labelled
_S. inflata_, Orange, Conn., belongs to this species.


=S. fallax= (Hansgirg) Wille.

This species is one of several forms near _S. insignis_ (Hass.)
Kützing. If Wille’s description is correct and identical with
Hansgirg’s material, then _S. inconstans_ Collins becomes a synonym
of _S. fallax_. Hansgirg’s figure suggests that the filaments in his
material are homosexual. While Wille’s description and figure suggests
that the filaments are reflexed and that conjugation does not regularly
occur between parallel filaments, with the spores all in one filament.
It is difficult to decide just where these rough-spored forms belong
as the earlier authors did not pay much attention to spore markings.
In this connection the note by Professor Nordstedt in connection with
specimen No. 958 in Wittrock and Nordstedt’s Algae Exsiccatae is of
interest. Until these forms have been clearly separated by a study
of the original collections it seems best to use _S. fallax_ for _S.
inconstans_, of which the type is P. B.-A. No. 1568. Here also belongs
P. B.-A. No. 1570, Middlesex Fells, Mass., and P. B.-A. No. 1571,
Wakefield, Mass.


=S. floridana= nov. sp.

Cellulis vegetativis 56-66µ × 120-335µ, dissepimentis planis;
chromatophoris 4-5, subrectis vel anfractibus arctis .5; cellulis
conjugatis abbreviatis, inflatis (ad 135µ) et geniculatis; canalis
conjugationis brevis et latis; zygosporis ellipticis, 75-105µ × 95-135µ
membrana media glabra, lutea.

Vegetative cells 56-66µ × 120-335µ, end walls plane; 4-5
chromatophores, nearly straight or making a half turn; conjugating
cells geniculate, shortened; fertile cells inflated up to 135µ;
conjugating tube very short and broad; zygospores ellipsoid, 75-105µ ×
95-135µ median wall smooth, yellow. Type in U. S. National Herbarium,
collected by J. D. Smith, in S. W. Florida, March, 1878.

In its dimensions _S. floridana_ is intermediate between _S. stictica_
(Eng. Bot.) Wille and _S. ceylanica_ Wittrock. In several publications
the statement is made that _S. ceylanica_ is intermediate between _S.
stictica_ and the common forms of _Spirogyra_. A study of authentic
material of this species has shown that it has not intermediate
characters, but with its spores having a minutely pitted median
wall, it seems to be intermediate between _S. floridana_ and _S.
illinoiensis_ Transeau, the most specialized form in the Sirogonium
group of the genus.

Throughout the study of these collections the writer has been greatly
assisted by Mr. Hanford Tiffany, now a teacher in the Charleston,
Illinois, High School. It is a pleasure to acknowledge my indebtedness
to the many collectors who have sent me specimens for study.




ORGANIZATION OF THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY SCIENTIFIC SOCIETY.


As the result of the sentiment expressed at the 1914 meeting of the
Ohio Academy of Science that the official organ of the Academy, “The
Ohio Naturalist,” should be broadened and made more comprehensive in
scope, and feeling that the Ohio State University had no publication
representing the scientific work being done at the institution,
the members of the Biological Club of the University, in whom the
publication of the “Ohio Naturalist” had been vested, called a meeting
of representatives of the various departments interested in science at
the university to discuss the advisability of publishing as successor
to the “Naturalist” a journal to be known as the OHIO JOURNAL OF
SCIENCE.

The first meeting was held in May, 1915, and committees appointed to
outline preliminary plans. At subsequent meetings the reports of the
committees were discussed, interest in the plan continued to develop,
until at a meeting held October 13 the following self-explanatory
Constitution was adopted. The society as now constituted represents
twenty-four departments of pure or applied science at the university.

                                        RAYMOND J. SEYMOUR,
                                              Secretary Pro Tem.


CONSTITUTION.


ARTICLE I—NAME.

The name of this society shall be the Ohio State University Scientific
Society.


ARTICLE II—OBJECT.

It shall be the purpose of the Society to promote scientific work in
the University by holding meetings for the presentation and discussion
of the results of scientific work; by co-operating with other agencies
in arranging for scientific lectures and in the entertainment of
visiting scientists and scientific societies; by publishing the OHIO
JOURNAL OF SCIENCE and by furnishing opportunity for the discussion
and promotion of any project of scientific interest which may properly
come within the scope of such an organization and, in general, by
furthering in every way possible the interests of scientific work in
the University and the State.


ARTICLE III—MEMBERSHIP.

Any member of the instructional staff in the Ohio State University
interested in scientific work shall upon application be eligible
to election to membership in the Society. Students of the Ohio
State University interested in scientific work shall be eligible to
membership when endorsed by two faculty members of the society.


ARTICLE IV—OFFICERS.

SECTION 1. The officers of the society shall consist of President,
Vice-President, Secretary and Treasurer. These officers shall perform
the duties common to such positions.

SECTION 2. The Executive Committee shall consist of the officers
and the Editor of the OHIO JOURNAL OF SCIENCE. It shall have power
to arrange programs for meetings, to represent the society when
co-operating with other organizations and to conduct all affairs of the
society not otherwise provided for.


ARTICLE V—EDITORIAL BOARD.

The Editorial Board shall be responsible for the management of the OHIO
JOURNAL OF SCIENCE. It shall consist of representatives, one from each
department of science in the university represented in the society
membership. This board shall elect annually an Editor and two Associate
Editors.


ARTICLE VI—ELECTIONS.

Election to membership shall be by vote of the Executive Committee.

The officers shall be elected by ballot at the annual meeting in May.
Nominations shall be presented by a nominating committee which shall
consist of the Editorial Board.

One member of the Editorial Board shall be elected by each department
from among the members of such department represented in the society
and in case any department fails to elect a member for this board the
Executive Committee shall elect for the department.


ARTICLE VII—PUBLICATION.

The Editor and Associate Editors of the OHIO JOURNAL OF SCIENCE shall
have immediate direction of the publication. The department editors
shall be responsible for the approval of papers from their several
departments, and all papers offered for publication shall be submitted
to such department editors.

The selection for publication from available material shall be
determined by the Editorial Board.


ARTICLE VIII—QUORUM.

A quorum for the transaction of regular business shall consist of at
least fifteen members with a representation of at least one-third of
the departments included in the society.


ARTICLE IX—AMENDMENTS.

Amendments to the constitution may be made by the concurrence of
three-fourths of the members present at a duly called meeting, notice
of such amendment having been given to all members at least one week in
advance.


BY-LAWS.


ARTICLE I.

The membership fees of the society shall be twenty-five cents per year
or one dollar for a period of five years and such fee shall entitle the
members to participation in all activities of the society but shall not
include the subscription to the OHIO JOURNAL OF SCIENCE.


ARTICLE II.

The subscription price to the OHIO JOURNAL OF SCIENCE shall be
two dollars to non-members, and one dollar and seventy-five cents to
members.


ARTICLE III.

The fiscal year of the society shall coincide with that of the
University—July 1st to June 30th. The publication to be issued during
eight months, beginning with November.


ARTICLE IV.

Regular meetings shall be held on the second Tuesday evening of the
months of October, November, March, April and May. The meeting in
May shall be the annual meeting for the election of officers and
an editorial board. Other meetings may be called by the Executive
Committee, or by the President on petition of five members.


ARTICLE V.

The University Instructional Staff shall be understood to include any
member of the teaching force.


ARTICLE VI.

Amendments to the By-laws may be adopted at any regular meeting by vote
of a majority of the members present, notice of proposed amendment
having been given at time meeting is called.




                         The College Book Store

        Reference books in all departments of Higher Education.

              Biological Supplies and Advanced Text Books
                          new and secondhand.

                   OPPOSITE THE UNIVERSITY ENTRANCE.

                            COLUMBUS, OHIO.


                       The Bucher Engraving Co.,

                             COLUMBUS, OHIO

             Scientific Illustrations given extremely
             careful attention by highly skilled artisans
             using the most modern equipment


          DIE STAMPING.       PLATE AND LETTER PRESS PRINTING.

                         _SPAHR & GLENN,_

                    _PRINTERS and PUBLISHERS_.

              50 EAST BROAD STREET.        COLUMBUS, OHIO.


                       The Ohio State University

                                COLUMBUS

                   WILLIAM OXLEY THOMPSON, President.

            Ten Colleges and a Graduate School

                College of Agriculture
                College of Arts, Philosophy and Science
                College of Education
                College of Engineering
                College of Homeopathic Medicine
                College of Law
                College of Medicine
                College of Dentistry
                College of Pharmacy
                College of Veterinary Medicine
                Graduate School
                Summer Session (Eight weeks)

   For general information, catalogue, or special bulletin describing
   each college, with fees and announcement of courses

   Address:
           L. E. WOLFE, Secretary Entrance Board,
                        THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY


FOOTNOTES:

[A] Contribution from the Botanical Laboratory of the Ohio State
University, No. 91.

[B] Hallas, E., Om en ny Zygnema-Art med Azygosporer. Bot. Tidsskrift
20:1-16. 1895.

[C] See Fig. 3, Plate XXV, Amer. Jour. Bot. 1:301. 1914.

[D] Borge, O., Beitrage zur Algenflora von Schweden.

[E] Transeau, E. N., Annotated list of the Algae of Eastern Illinois.
Trans. Ill. Acad. Sci. 6:69-89, 1913.

[F] West, G. S., A contribution to our knowledge of the Freshwater
Algae of Columbia. Memoires de la Societe neuchateloise des Sciences
Naturelles 5:1013-1051. Neuchatel, 1914.


Transcriber’s Notes:

  Underscores “_” before and after a word or phrase indicate _italics_
    in the original text.
  Underscores are also used to designate a subscript. e.g. C_{6} H_{6}.
  Equal signs “=” before and after a word or phrase indicate =bold=
    in the original text.
  Carat symbol “^” designates a superscript.
  Small capitals have been converted to SOLID capitals.
  Illustrations have been moved so they do not break up paragraphs.
  Old or antiquated spellings have been preserved.
  Typographical errors have been silently corrected but other variations
    in spelling and punctuation remain unaltered.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Ohio Journal of Science, Vol. XVI,
No. 1, November 1915, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OHIO JOURNAL OF SCIENCE, NOV 1915 ***

***** This file should be named 54609-0.txt or 54609-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/4/6/0/54609/

Produced by Larry B. Harrison, Paul Marshall and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from images made available by the
HathiTrust Digital Library.)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

